[Feb 4 merge] Review GitHub lessons 0-3 (#105)
pyOpenSci/lessons: github-git/0-first-contribution.md

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
myst_html_meta:
    "title": "Intro to Collaborative GitHub: Make your first contribution to open source"
    "description lang=en": "Learn the steps involved with using GitHub to collaborate and contribute to open source code and documentation. A beginner-friendly guide."
    "keywords": "GitHub, OpenSource, beginner-friendly"
    "property=og:locale": "en_US"
    "og:image": /images/github/steps-to-contribute.png
    "og:image:alt": An image that shows the steps for contributing to open source on GitHub.
---

> # Mastering GitHub Collaboration Skills 

Author: @sneakers-the-rat, have a look at this version and see what you think. it's a different approach - but it gives the learner the steps first and then it sends them to pages with more info. (if they need it). i just don't know how this will land with people.

6. Add a descriptive commit message that describes the change that you made

Commit message examples:
> fix: fixed numerous typos in the filename.py file
>
> fix: updated the code to align with PEP 8 syntax
>
> fix: fixed typo in docstring text

:::

******

### Step 5: Submit a pull request

Once your edits are [committed to git version control](edit-commit-files), open a <kbd>Pull Request</kbd> to the parent repository.

:::{button-link} pull-request.html
:color: primary
:shadow:

<i class="fa-brands fa-leanpub" style="color: #6ec9c3;"></i> Learn how to create a GitHub pull request
:::

:::{admonition} Activity: Submit a PR to the pyOpenSci parent repository
Create a <kbd><i class="fa-solid fa-code-pull-request"></i> Pull Request</kbd> to the [pyOpenSci parent repository](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/pyos-demo-package-contribute), from the branch on your fork that you worked on in the previous lesson.
:::

Once your PR is open, it's time to sit back and wait for the maintainers, collaborators, or project owners to review/comment on your PR. Be patient; this step can take time as people are busy and often donate their time to this effort!

********

> ## Many people's first contributions are to documentation 

Author: from @sneakers-the-rat try to incorporate the learner's perspective here

* Sometimes, a learner will notice documentation bugs that a maintainer misses.

> In this lesson, you make your first open source contribution by updating documentation (including docstrings) rather than code. Many people start with small fixes like typos, which are simpler to contribute as you don't always need a development environment but are still valuable. Developers often focus on code, leaving less time for writing and editing documentation. So your small contributions can have a large impact.

Author: from @ucodery - some projects do NOT welcome small pr's. i need to know more about that to write about it! i had no idea that was a thing and I've never encountered it. Jeremiah, any feedback is welcome!!

> In this lesson, you make your first open source contribution by updating documentation (including docstrings) rather than code. Many people start with small fixes like typos, which are simpler to contribute as you don't always need a development environment but are still valuable. Developers often focus on code, leaving less time for writing and editing documentation. So your small contributions can have a large impact.
> 
> Further, if you go to contribute and find that the contributing guidelines lack detail, that could also be a useful place for you to start. 

Author: ```suggestion
In this lesson, you make your first open source contribution by updating documentation (including docstrings) rather than code. Many people start with small fixes like typos, which are simpler to contribute as you don't always need a development environment but are still **highly valuable**. 

### <i class="fa-solid fa-rocket"></i> Fresh eyes make a difference! <i class="fa-solid fa-rocket"></i>

When you’re new to a project, you may notice gaps and unclear explanations that long-time contributors might overlook. Maintainers and developers are often too close to their own work to see what’s missing. Your perspective helps make the project more accessible to future contributors.

By catching confusing phrasing, outdated information, or missing details (even in contributing documentation), you improve the onboarding experience for others while making a meaningful first contribution!
```

Author: @sneakers-the-rat this might capture that idea of fresh eyes are always better  emphasize what the new contributor offers...

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

(first-contribution)=
# Make Your First Open Source Contribution 

:::{admonition} What you will learn

After completing this tutorial, you will have the skills needed to contribute to an open source GitHub 
repository. You will use the [pyOpenSci example GitHub repository](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/pyos-demo-package-contribute) to practice making contributions. 
:::

Contributing to open source in a public space like GitHub can feel intimidating. You may not know the project maintainers, feel unsure about your GitHub skills, or wonder where to begin.

> This lesson series will teach you how to collaborate on code and documentation using GitHub. It will help you confidently contribute to a GitHub repository and build skills to collaborate with colleagues (some of whom you may not have met in real life!). 

Reviewer: what's the context for these lessons? do the students already know rough contours of what open source is, why one might want to contribute to something, etc.?

Author: I suspect we need a context page. I"m going to update this page (i just merged Jeremiahs inline stuff). I reorganized this (but I want your feedback) to be a set of activities with links to the background for each. i'm not sure if this is the best way or not.

but this is what i imagine

we have sprints regularly and people come that are new to contributing. I can send them to this page and it walks them through all of the steps with background information on each following page on how to implement each. I've never designed a lesson like this before, so I'm not sure how it will land. So i think we might want to add a context page first about contributing and github (potentially?) That context might be something like [this page](https://www.pyopensci.org/lessons/github-git/intro.html) with more focus on open source.  

these pages are online because i have a grant deadline but i still want to do reviews like we always do ❤️

## GitHub workflow summary

:::{figure} /images/github/steps-to-contribute.png
:alt: alt text here

The steps for making your first contribution to an open source repo. In this lesson, you will do all of your work on GitHub.com, meaning you don't need to clone or make a copy of your repository locally. This is a great way to get started with contributing. It minimizes the command line skills that you will need to use git. 
:::

> ## Documentation counts! 

Reviewer: This comes a little bit out of nowhere, we are still in overview mode and we're already talking about what kind of PRs we can make. Seems like this would fit better in "identify issue"

Author: It does! I'm going to address these comments now and then update this doc, as I did rework this section a bit. But now i see Jeremiah's comment below about small pr's not being welcome in some projects! i just didn't know that was a thing.

It's common for your first contribution

> to be to documentation! Documentation contributions can be incredibly valuable as developers often don't have time to work on documentation and code!

Reviewer: "...incredibly valuable, as your perspective is the best way for developers who are too familiar with the project to know what is unclear to everyone else."

or something like that, centering the learner <3

> Fixing typos and other small documentation issues makes for great, easy-to-create (and review) first pull requests. In fact, if you find that the contributing information isn't detailed enough, that could also be your first contribution!

Author: Oh wow - @ucodery i didn't know that!! some won't accept those types of pr's at all? All of my first contributions were those kinds. can you help me better understand this so we can capture it?

> Fixing typos and other small documentation issues makes for great, easy-to-create (and review) first pull requests. In fact, if you find that the contributing information isn't detailed enough, that could also be your first contribution!

Author: Oh that's interesting. Given that, maybe we need a short blurb that better explains that issue. i'll turn this into an issue in this repo to ensure we acknowledge it. I could see drive by contributions when someone is just trying to get github cred being really challenging
